If any point people can hear music in the background, it's my neighbour who's playing very loud music. So if it's really loud and tell me and I will move room or something, and but yeah, my name is Sam Langton. I'm a research researcher at Manchester Metropolitan University. And I mainly actually do sociology and criminology. I'm not a geographer by background, and but the sort of subfield of criminology that I work in, focuses on, on the spatial distribution of crime. So both where crimes occur on things like well known offenders live, and in particular, the relationship between well known offenders live and where crimes occur. And so I've come I'm sort of a, you know, I've learned GIS as a sort of trial and error process over the past few years. But it's absolutely invaluable tool for me in Research both in academia and for police forces. And so the material that we're going to cover today is actually online. So I know that this session is being recorded, but I will also go through a demonstration with some data. And so the data will be available online. So if you don't have to follow this link now, because of course, it will be shown for you. And there's a GitHub link. If you're not familiar with GitHub, it doesn't matter. And it's just I can use it as a repository to store teaching material on and so if you have q j s already installed and you want to follow along with what I'm doing, please go ahead. But if you want to just fit in veteran and go through all of this later on, you can because all the material will be available and they are completely up to you whether you whether you follow along but if I was you I would just sit and watch because I think it's more relaxing and you might you might get more inspiration from it, then try to follow along. So what is GIS? So GIS is the geographic information systems. And key GIS is just one of many GIS software that are available. And GIS are pieces of software that you use for basically using spatial information. So you can store spatial information, you can manipulate it and change it, you can visualise it, which is probably what I most a lot of people want to do. So basically just build maps, whether it's beautiful looking maps, or interesting looking that and you can also analyse spatial information, you've been sort of, you know, spatially spatially sensitive statistics, which we won't cover today, anyway. And you're actually probably familiar with GIS in a kind of informal way. And so actually, last week, Sam covered OpenStreetMap and it doesn't matter whether you were at the workshop last week or not, if you go on the OpenStreetMap website, Very similar to Google Maps, you know, it's an online platform that contains spatial information and you can interactively engage with this information. You can zoom in, you can query things. And and I think many people would say, okay, technically it's not a joke. But the concept is quite similar. So this idea of GIS software is probably not completely alien to you, because stuff like OpenStreetMap stuff like Google Maps is kind of in the same ballpark of what GIS is. And it is an entire field and it's an entire community of people. Like I said, I am basically a criminologist. So I'm kind of on the periphery of this field. But if you go to academic conferences, I've put a link in the presentation to GIS or UK, and conferences like that. And if you're not an academia, it doesn't matter. There's lots of practitioners there as well from private companies, but GIS or UK is a very good An example of how diverse the field is. And so there is a panel on criminology, but there is also a panel on geology and transport and various other different things. It's very, very diverse. It's used in academia, it's used in government used by charities used by the military and private sector all the way from, like mining companies, to almost certainly banks with pretty much anything you could think of. Very, very diverse and therefore a very useful tool to know. So aside from that, what I you know, you're here, so you must have some motivation to learn GIS, but just in case you're slightly unconvinced. It's very useful. It's very diverse, because basically many processes that we we experience and research on a daily basis are basically spatial, even if you don't think of them in that way. Some things you might be quite familiar with. So in the UK, for example, things like regional inequality, even if you don't think about it in mapping terms, or in quantitative terms, you are aware of this kind of geographic pattern to two very important issues in society. And, and this is not, of course, this is not just specific to the UK, you have this regional inequality in Italy, in Germany, you know, east and west, north and south. And basically any country you can think of this kind of kind of pattern emerges, you see in politics, and so everyone's forgotten about Brexit already, but that is a map of, for example, the European referendum. And of course, you see the spatial patterns in voting behaviour, which is due to all manner of different reasons, but that, you know, the geography is a very underlying concept. It's all of these things. And on a more local level, stuff like neighbourhood deprivation, you know, just you know, these are things Things that we know about these are things that are intrinsically geographic. And you know, the problem is geographic. And the way you solve it is also is also geographic using stuff like GIS. And just as a plug these awesome maps that I actually made for an article in the conversation if people would like to read it, because obviously, it's great. And stuff like crime concentrations, which is my area of research, you know, you will know intuitively, that crime tends to concentrate in particular areas, because in your head, subconsciously or not, there are areas that you might avoid during certain times of day, you might be a little bit more anxious in certain areas because of worry about crime, but even the things that you can formally study using GIS software transport as well. Another great example that this guy Robin lovely, is if you're into transport, or if you're into geography in general, he's just all around enthusiastic and inspirational person, so I highly recommend you look him up. And yeah, and he particularly cycling infrastructure, and which of course your geography is a key component in that as well. And GIS is a major tool in transport infrastructure research. So yeah, key GIS is just one of these pieces of software. And it's a freely available GIS application, which is, you know, it's just one of the many benefits that has, I think it's quite useful because it means of course, that the barriers to entry for using the software it's, it's, you know, it's quite low. You don't have to subscribe to anything. You don't have to pay a feed anything as many of you might have already. You can just download it and you can just use it. And in the same way that you can for GIS more generally, you can create spatial data in college if you can handle it, you can edit it, you can analyse it, and perhaps most importantly, you can visualise spatial information. So YQ Jaya, specifically, why not? There are many other GIS software out there. Stuff like ArcGIS is something that you might be familiar with. That's basically the standard for tool on undergraduate courses. And it's also widely used in, in private sector. A key one is that it's open source. So not only does that mean it's free, but it also means that it develops very quickly and very openly compared to many sort of closed pieces of software. And you might be familiar with some of these in this list here, depending on what kind of things you're interested in. But some of them we will all know, Wikipedia, for example. It's technically an open source web platform, because basically anyone could contribute to that. And that's what we mean when we say open source, Android, which is an operating system for mobile phones. You know, the basic version of Android is also open source. Anyone can download it, anyone can edit it. And then and then more specific things. Like are in the bottom right. That's something that Sam mentioned earlier that is an open source piece of software. Python , yeah and GIS is just, it's just one of these things. And yeah, big benefit is free. A big benefit, as we'll see is that it means it's continuous development. So rather than having a closed piece of software that you're subscribed to, that might be updated every year. Or even more infrequently than that cue Jaya is just in constant development because anyone from me to you to to people who work in GIS professionally can edit the code behind the key Jaya krint new tools, very specific fields. And for that reason, it's just constantly developing which you know, means you're always up to date with the latest stuff in GIS. It also means I think that it's very community driven, which is a big reason why I like using the software. You know, if you want help for Huge is online, if you want free teaching, like, you know, like what we have here, people are always very open and very willing to help you, which is something you don't always get with other pieces of software. The fact it's open also means it has this wide range of functionality, because there are so many different people from different sectors and different research domains contributing to it that it doesn't really matter what research field or private sector company you're working for, you know, there will be something for you in queue Jaya. As cross platform, you can use it across Windows, Mac will stuff like that. And then, you know, a bit more technical, but it's quite diverse in terms of the data formats that you can use as well for the very reason that it's not that multiple people use it from different disciplines. And yeah, community is just fantastic. It's I think it's definitely a characteristic of open source software more generally, but you get this great community of people So that's like a huge is conference, for example. But like a third online help for college is it's just fantastic. And people are very open people very helpful. And so that's, that's really a big motivation for using it over other software. It's also quite accessible as a mapping piece of software, it's quite accessible. And part of the reason for that is that it's like it's a point and click interface. So you don't have to learn any any code in order to use it. And you can just go ahead and get right into it. You know, it's the point point, a click thing means that there's no again, no barriers to, to being able to use it. Of course, it takes time to get used to it. There's still some challenges there. But not having to learn code is a big advantage to and so GIS fundamentals in general, I mean, like I said, GIS, if it fields it's very, very large. field and it's a it's also a very technical field as well. So you might find that you feel like grommet here, and I sometimes feel like that as well. Because you know, it's very, it's very technical field and you have to try and keep your head above the water when you're dealing with quite technical subjects. But what should motivate you is that you can get very far  in GIS, and in mapping with just a basic understanding of these fundamentals, don't be pissed off, if you come across very technical things online, you know, know that you can overcome it, and that you can actually, you can know enough to make, you know, accurate, useful and beautiful maps into GIS without this technical background that some people might have. So don't be put off by that if you share that online. And, well, I will cover a few of them now. The first one being spatial data. So it sounds quite obvious that spatial data is Basically a representation of the real world. So when you when you look at even a satellite image or a map in a book, or Google Maps or OpenStreetMap, what we are essentially trying to do is represent real world information as accurately and as intuitively as possible. And, and spatial data does this by basically describing the location of things on Earth. It describes in terms of where they are, but it also describes them in terms of their size in relation to other objects and also the shape that they have. And and, you know, one of the big challenges of spatial data is okay, how can we describe and quantify things on the Earth's surface in a way that is intuitive in a way that it's usable? And there are many different ways of doing this, but it's kind of it seems like an obvious thing to say, but I think it's quite a useful underlying concept to have is when you're making a map or you are trying to do is represent Real World as accurately and as intuitively as possible, because you know, in making that transformation that result from the real world to GIS and to mapping, there's always going to be some kind of ambiguity and inaccuracy in it, but you kind of do the best you can with what you have. And so one of the key types of spatial data that we come across today, and again, it's one that you might be kind of familiar with intuitively through using stuff like Google Maps and OpenStreetMap is what's called vector spatial data. Again, some people who might be familiar with these terms might think, Okay, what a horrible term on earth does that mean? These things are actually quite intuitive. And so vector spatial data is essentially it attempts to represent the real world through either points, lines or polygons. So points are, you can broadly consider them to be coordinates, which again, intuitively you might be quite familiar with. And lines are just basically different points. joined up together, and then polygons or points joined up together but then formed a kind of, you know, a closed a closed shape. So when we look at satellite image of a facility, you want to try and represent that information using points, lines or polygons. And so you're simplifying things but you're doing it in a way that makes it readable for computers. And it means you can visualise things and analyse stuff quite easily. So an example I try and use this debate this is actually the first map that I made huge is this was my trial and error way of learning que Jaya, there's a map of Middle Earth in northern rings, people they're now kind of nerdy, but also a great way to learn ki Jaya. And you can see by looking at it, hopefully, that this map with all this information, it is essentially just made up of points, lines and polygons. So each town or city is just a point. It's just an idea. xy coordinate defining weather is in Middle Earth. I put like stars, different coloured styles and different shapes to, you know, show different things. But essentially, it's just a point demonstrating where the city is. You then have flight, you know, one step of complexity, you have lines to represent the rivers, you have lines to represent the coastline. I think there might be roads on there somewhere as well. But again, you just representing representing something, of course, it's a bad example because I say, okay, maps are reps representations of the real world. And my example is something that is natural in real life. It's a, you know, a fictitious world, but you get the idea, okay, it's more or less the same with with wherever you're looking at. And then of course, we have polygons to represent the forests and the lakes, because these are, these are closed areas, and that's why they're kind of coloured in that way. And so something you know, it's not The most useful map in the world, but it's not bad. And it's just purely composed of vector spatial data, which is points, lines and polygons, which is what we will deal with today. Another fundamental in GIS, and this is something that many people struggle with. And I still find quite confusing sometimes. So don't be concerned if that is out. But it's something just at least for now, just to be aware of is the idea of projections. So as I said before, and you know, when we make a map, we're representing the real world, the real the real world is more spherical. And yet, we are actually trying to represent stuff on earth onto a flat a flat surface. So this might be a piece of paper might be a poster, it might be more likely on a computer screen. So to represent something that's spherical on a flat surface, like a piece of paper or a screen, you have to transform that shape onto a flat. And that transformation is known as a projection. And projections are you know that transformation can be done in many different ways. It's a very, you know, mathematical and technical thing to do. But just being aware that that is something that you have, when you're using huge IIS or any GIS, you will have to consider how your data is projected how that transformation is being made. And I've put a link there, if you click on the projection, part of the presentation to actually the cube is documentation, because that actually gives you a very good overview of what projections are, you know, why they need to be used and the complexities around them. So if you want to read more, I would recommend that documentation, but for now, because we deal with it later on. And an important thing to be aware of is the coordinate reference system and the coordinate reference system is basically it describes the link between the spherical and the 2d map that you're going to be using it within cube is or whatever it might be. And when you download data online, as you probably will, and we can do that today that helps. When you download data, wherever you are, wherever you download it from, it's important to think, Okay, what is the coordinate reference system that this data is in? The reason why that's important will become a bit clearer later. But it's such an important concept to think about when you download data. You have to think, Okay, what is the coordinate reference reference system of this data? How is this data currently being projected? Because you want to make sure you're going to do it accurately within QGIS. And there are two I'll refer to it as CRS, and that's a common way of describing it. So there are two main types of CRS. The first one is a geographic era, and that is almost certainly something You've come across already, even though you might not realise that, because the geographic CRF uses latitude and longitude coordinates to describe where things are on the Earth's surface. So if I go on on Google Maps, I should be using OpenStreetMap. I realised that Google Maps does the job, I think, if you click on anywhere on Google Maps, so actually, if I use the example of Greenwich in London, that might be far more intuitive. Okay, well, anyway, I guess I could search all the files. And so if you click anywhere on Google Maps, so I use grants of example, because as many of you know, that's considered to be like, it's like the Prime Meridian So it's basically zero degrees longer today. So if I click somewhere vaguely near the role Observatory, and you look down at the Boston, hopefully you can see that on the bottom of the screen. If you can't see it on the bottom of screen, it's actually also in the URL at the top of the link, you can see that it displays the latitude and the longest two coordinates. And basically, that is the geographic CRF that is making the link between this 2d surface that I'm looking at and the real world and it allows you to locate real you know, things on Earth from from your, from your 2d map. And, but there is also another type of CRS, it's called the projected CRS and there are many, many different types of projected CRS one that you might be you might have heard, you know, in conversation or you know, looking at Ordnance Survey maps is something called the British National Grid. And, and, you know, there are projected future Are SS for basically anywhere anywhere on earth but very specific places on earth because and yeah, okay there are projected CRS is for particular places on earth, but also for particular purposes. So some some projected CRS are very good for measuring the, the area or the shape of particular things, some are good for navigational purposes. Again, it's like it's a whole topic. We know where we can cover it all today with tape, you know, people study this things feed for years on end. But it's just a case of thinking, Okay, and when you download data online, what is the projected CRF data event so you can ensure that you tell Qt is what CRF is. And then also if you're doing something potentially a bit more complex, you have to think okay, what is the most appropriate CRS given given what I'm doing? And But yeah, I would say too broadly If you're new to GIS in particular, if you're new to que Jaya, it's basically just be aware of these things. And if you're not sure about them, then obviously you have to do a bit of reading or you can ask people, and it's just an important fundamental thing to know about when using GIS. So if things seem very odd, hopefully they'll become a little bit clearer through a demonstration. And so for this demonstration, I'm going to be using data about Metrolink station. So that is the tram system in Greater Manchester. And, and this dates again, if you're following along this site is on the GitHub repository. And so if I open up hopefully you can when I change window, you can see this, this this fight all these files I have here on the GitHub repository, so you can follow this along later. But basically, I compiled some data about tram stops in in Greater Manchester, and it's compiled as a CSV file, so it's basically a spreadsheet. So if I open up this now, okay, so you'll have heard what I said, but I guess not seen it. I'll just go through it quickly again. So this is a, this is the mundane spreadsheet that I was referring to. And basically just contains information about tram stops in Greater Manchester, we have this variable called stop at the top, which is the tram stop name. We have stuff like the line that each tram stop is on, we have various different reference reference numbers. But as I was saying, we have these two variables called easting. The northern and this is the spatial part of the data even a XL doesn't know that it's facial, but when you download information like this for from from the internet, and you have these coordinates, you know, okay, this does contain geographic information. And like I said, when you see variables called eastings, and northings in your data, you will be thinking not because Everyone knows this, but because you will, you will google it or someone will, someone will help you help you out with it your thing, okay, this is going to be in the British National Grid. And we'll see why that's important later. And it's not always an eastern and northern. So for example, if you download and open police recorded crime data in England and Wales when you go on if I, I wouldn't download the data, but if I if I'm going to have a if I yeah, I want to actually see my screen. So please let me know if you can't, but I'm pretty sure you should be able to see that we can see. If you go on, like for example, open please crime data. In the UK, in England and Wales, technically, when you download this data, you get it in a spreadsheet. I might as well just do that. When you download this data this is I just chose Avon and Somerset for no particular reason. This is basically open three, four quarter crime data for this particular please for when you download it, it's a similar it's a boring spreadsheet, but it contains longitude and latitude coordinates. So it's no different in how much information you have compared to the tram stop data. But you're just thinking, okay, as long as you've lost your coordinates, it's going to be a different CRS and if it's eastings, and northings, and that will be why that is important. become clear when we go to key GIS. And but yeah, today we're using this this chunk of data, we have the easting and northing coordinates, but like I said, as an actual spreadsheet, it does not actually doing anything for us spatially at the moment. So I'll open up q Jaya, and I'll remember to switch my screen. If you have key giants, you're more than welcome to open it but if not You can just Once it loads I will be able to switch over. Okay, so yes, so when you when you open ki Jaya, you get this interface more or more or less this interface might depend on what version you're using or whether you've opened up Cujo as before. But essentially, this is what you'll get and check yet. And so when you when you when you open it in the main window there, but the big one that my mouth is around, that's basically the map view. So when you load in a map or you create spatial data, it will show in this window here. And on the left, you have this layer tab. And again, it'll become clear when we load in data exactly what that tab does. And but essentially, if you load in multiple sources of data, layered them up on top of one another You can switch them around or whenever it might, whatever it might be that you want to do. And then at the top, we have a load of different tools. Obviously, if you've never opened up before, none of these will make any sense. And it might be a bit overwhelming, but through an example will hopefully show you that it's actually quite usable. So we have this spreadsheet about tram stops. We have the eastings and northings locations of each one. And we want to load that data into cue Jaya. So how you do that is basically you want to add a layer to cue Jaya. So a layer basically being one type of spatial information you want to load it. And you either have a delimited text layer because that is what a CSV file is. If you have it in a different form, as you can see, there's plenty of other options. It's just we happen to be using a CSV file. And then when we click our delimited layer, it will open up another window which to me is absurdly large, but hopefully that means you can see it and then we just defined Whether CSV is on our computer, so if I click, I've clicked on this on this.in, the top right, and you just choose the location of the fault of the file, which for me is here, and it's called trans geo. That's what it will be called for you as well, if you download the GitHub page, and then you open it up. And you can see actually, quite cleverly, first it gives, it gives you an overview of what the data looks like, and how it's loaded. And just to check, it's actually works. And you can see it's actually worked quite well, we have this preview at the bottom. And that is basically an exact replica of what our spreadsheet in Excel showed. So we have to stop naming the line name, the eastings and northings. But you will also notice, and it may or may not do this automatically for you. It might be because I've opened up the data before but I think uj does actually read the names of variables and try and guess what the coordinates are in family gas. correctly that we have these things Northern's, and it gets because the X is instant at they like this, and why being northerns that that is the way around that the coordinates are going to go. And importantly, if my goodness, hopefully that will make my terrible explanation earlier a bit clearer. In fact, the GaNS the CRF. So it's gas that we are going to be using a projective CRS of the British National Grid. So it's got British National Grid written there. But it also has this thing called an epsg code. And, you know, To cut a long story short, the epsg code is basically a unique identifier for different types of ci, and the British National Grid happens to be 27700. And that's quite useful if managed to do this automatically. If it doesn't know how to do that automatically. Then you just have to select which variables you want. And if you click on it, it brings up this column drop down menu and then you choose which of the columns in your spreadsheet are the coordinates that you're referring to. And I'm going to minimise things to one. Once I have this date, I can then click Add. I'm hoping you can see all of these windows again, please interrupt me if you come up when you click Add, and then load this data in. And so in this process is essentially pulls what is not spatial information, which is you know, coordinates in a spreadsheet, which in itself do not mean anything. We've told Jaya, what it means to learn from what what is x and what one using instinct for naught. And then we told it, what CRS is going to be another essentially the base information you want when you're learning in data. And now you have essentially the state Just vision of tram stops. It's a Manchester, which in itself, I think is quite cool. But I mean, it doesn't really tell us a great deal. And but there's lots of things you can do do in Q Jaya, to give you a bit more insight into the data. And so on a basic level, we can open at the top, the attribute table, the attribute table is essentially the spreadsheet. So it's kind of like the data behind behind the map that we're looking at. So if you click on that, it will just open up a window when you are in huge is you can view this attribute table at the same time after map essentially, another you kind of fear when I select these various different things, the map with the dots on and will highlight depending on on what you're actually looking at. And so I will now go back to I will go back to key Jaya. So now you should be able to see the dots again, as we saw previously. And Alex said it felt this is maybe not the most exciting or useful thing in the world. But what is really very, very useful if you right click on layers deep loaded in, you can change what I call the properties of the spatial data. And so if you right click on the name automatically called trans geo and click on Properties, and I realised when I click on it, you're probably not gonna be able to see it, but I will change the screen sharing so that you can say, yeah, you should be able to see this window and also the map behind hopefully. And, and when you look at the properties of the layer, it tells you a whole a whole host of different stuff, stuff like this era. So we can see here that it's like British National Grid, which is what we asked before, but importantly, and kind of most, you know, exciting about it, I guess is that we can change what's called the centre Balaji in the symbology is basically what these dots looked like. So we can change their visual appearance to all kinds of crazy shapes and crazy colours. But we can also change them according to particular variables as well. And so let's say if we were interested in colouring in these dots by the line at the station, so we wanted to just they're currently all purple, because that's just a default colour that you use. But if we wanted to colour each.by, the line that the station is on, we can choose this option called categorised. And we use categorise, because we know that the idea of a line being on the ultra non line or whatever it might be, it's going to be like it's split into categories, you're going to want to call it each one by by a categorical you know, segmentation of colours, essentially. Again, if you get used to this through exploring it yourself, but I mean for the purposes of this example is quite useful. So we change the symbology to categorised, and then we can choose various different variables that we have in our attribute table. And you can see it has all of them even including eastings and northings. But we actually have a variable called line as well. So we click on line, we can then select a colour palette for it. There are loads and loads of different colour palette. This is a default that's available, but I'm pretty sure you can download more because this is the kind of thing that's great about being open source is that people develop all sorts of crazy pallets that some good Some are bad, but a good one here is very dense because Veritas is slightly more easy for people who are colorblind to see so that is the one that we'll use. Once you choose the colour palette, you can then click on classify at the bottom and then it will automatically recognise like the unique categories have the line variable and then assign a colour to each one. And by default, it always adds this other values category, which I find quite irritating. I understand why they do that it can be quite irritating, but you can basically select it, and then click this red minus at the bottom there just to get rid of it. So, yeah, we've got two questions I thought might be there. They're quite good. Just quickly, he didn't mind answer them. One of them is from an asks, Can you load a map to see these points in the context of a Manchester map? For example? If I'm correct, you're going to be coming to that in a second. Yeah, yeah. So I mean, I can briefly say now like when I was talking about layers before, the written the great thing about layers is it means you can load multiple different types of map all at the same time and then layered on top of one another. So I will get to that Just I think it's just Steena I forgive me if I'm if I'm pronouncing your name wrong. has asked Can Can we instal or add palettes to cute? Yes. Yeah, I'm pretty sure you can, because there's quite a lot of palettes that are available by default but something I'll cover in a minute and I realised I need to get a move on a little bit. But something I'll cover in a minute is that because cube is is open source, which means anyone can contribute to it. Yeah, it has lots of plugins for it. plugins, basically just being you know, additional features that you can add and download cue Jaya, and I suspect although I don't know that there will be plugins for additional colour palettes. And so my tentative answer is yes, you can. Great thanks, Sam. Thank you. Okay. So yeah, I'll get our Get a move on now cuz I realised lots of colour. We've chosen the variable that we want to change our colours by, we chose In the palette that we want to use, and then if you click Apply, hopefully, again, you will see your fields. But in the background, you've seen that it's now coloured these points by line, which is quite useful in a kind of the least exploratory way. And there's loads of other stuff you can deal with with the properties, I'm just going to go through them quickly. Basically, just to show you the kinds of things that you can do. Of course, you're not going to remember that just to kind of show off what you can do. You can add labels to each thing to each spatial entity that you've loaded in. So I will load I will label them with a stop name, for example. You can change like the font sizes and the font colour and all stuff like that. If I just do it, do it quickly as the basic one. You know, it's named every point that we have in our data set according to the according to the stock name. And yeah, someone dealt with late afternoon About layers, and I can deal with plugins at the same time here as well. For the moment we've loaded that we've loaded in these points, and it looks kind of cool, but it's got it has no context to it at all currently. And so a great thing and it links back to what Sam covered last week, you can add a plugin, which you do at the top here. So if I click Manage and instal plugins, my heart is not thinking every time I open up a new window, because I suspect you're not gonna be able to share but hopefully you can. We can see it. I'll speak up when we can't see it. Yeah. And I opened up this new window, which is basically all the plugins that are available. And you can see there is a crazy crazy amount of plugins that you can download for Q Jaya. And all of these will basically extend the functionality of what you get by default with Qt. And so I already have it installed, but if you don't, you would just search I think it's called Quick map. So yeah, quick map services, you click on that there, and it will take you to kind of like a summary page of the package. But it's quick map services is great because basically you can use Open Street Map layers within que Jaya. And so rather than just having a load of points on a map with no context, you can, you can put this OpenStreetMap layer behind it, and to kind of see where it fits into whatever your study region is. So I already have it installed. So I'm not gonna I'm not going to do anything here. But if you don't have it installed, you search for the plug in name, and then at the bottom right, you can just click instal plugin. Once you've installed it, it will appear somewhere on the top left. I always find that these plugins appear in seemingly random places. But I know that quick map services appears on the web. And then it gives you it's giving you all this additional functionality, many of which I haven't actually explored, but you appear to have like something like NASA information about earthquakes fires. But you also have this OpenStreetMap layer. And if you just want to use the standard layer, click on it, it just instantly adds this layer to our map. And, and importantly, because I keep talking about layers on the left hand side, you can see that it added something to the to the layer summary on the left, and it's just named LFM standard. And frequently, you'll have like dozens of layers open at any one time. And you basically they're quite useful because you can mix them around a little bit. So this will be a stupid demonstration because it's going to change things in a way we don't want. But you can basically just click and drag in between each layer. So if I wanted the OpenStreetMap layer on top of the Tron layer, I could just drag it up. And of course now all those dots have disappeared. But this is quite useful when you have other information like this actually useful. To change the order on it, and the OpenStreetMap layer, you can change the properties of in the same way that we change the properties of the points. And it's a little bit different because it's, it's a different type of data. It's not points, but you can change basic stuff about it, like the, like the contrast and the colour. And if I change it to grayscale, yeah, I usually find that that looks slightly better, but it doesn't overtake the map too much. And now we get a bit of concept a bit bit of context to our points, you can see that it does actually match reality. And you can follow you know, each tram line across across this, this OpenStreetMap which I think is quite cool. And since someone asked, I'm gonna risk it a little bit and I'm going to open up a another layer as well as this and it also demonstrates Open up a different type of different type of data. Again, this is not something that you need to be concerned with following along, it's more just like showing off what you GIS can do, hopefully, like motivating you to use it. And so we can add spatial data that already exists, we can click Add vector layer. And then I'm going to have to find some data from Manchester to show you which I should have. And you may or may not be able to see my working directory, it doesn't actually matter. If I find I have a load of Manchester shape files on my on my laptop already, but these shape files I'm going to load in which are basically just the boundaries of neighbourhoods in Greater Manchester. These are openly downloadable, downloadable from the UK Data Service website. So I've called them GM LS LA. Again, I know these files look a bit crazy, but I just want to show you that it can do cool things rather than Explain literally everything. And then Okay, we know we now have this is a good example. So this is now vector polygon data because we've we've downloaded we've loaded in what are essentially boundaries to two neighbourhoods in Greater Manchester. So we now have two different types of vector data on this map, we have point vector data, which is the tram stops because they are defined through coordinates. And we also have polygon vector data, because it's defined through lots and lots of different points joined up together to form to form a closed boundary. And it's decided to out the polygon layer in the middle. So it's like in between trans and OpenStreetMap, which I think kind of makes sense actually. And, but to make it a bit clearer, again, we can change the properties of this vector polygon layer, and 3d we can change just the basic symbology of The map, so we're not going to change these neighbourhood boundaries by a variable, we're just going to change the colour. And just to make it easier, I'm just going to choose a transparent fill. So that will just show the boundaries of the neighbourhood instead of trying to colour them in. And when we click Apply, it's done, kind of just got rid of the colour completely. It's kind of a lot going on in this map now, so maybe if I just take, I'm gonna, it's gonna take the labels off the Trump stop, because when you have the OpenStreetMap you don't necessarily need that. But yeah, but that hopefully that as an example of like adding different layers on the advantage someone asked about that should we have, we have the OpenStreetMap layer. We also have this vector polygon layer of different neighbourhoods in Manchester. And then we also have the vector point layer of the tram stops in Manchester, which Oh, no, you can imagine that hopefully, you can see that with a bit of fiddling around But the property, it's actually relatively, I don't say easy, because when you first use it, it won't be easy. And it will be confusing probably. But it's relatively straightforward to make. To make maps intuitive is whether it's just for exploring data, which is basically what I'm doing here, because I'm just like moving around and looking maybe which tram stops line which neighbourhood, or whatever it might be, but also for actually creating something that might look quite good, you know, on a presentation or a poster or whatever it might be. And I think I'm going to be quiet because I've talks far longer than I thought going to. And but yeah, that's, that's more or less how you go about using huge if it can do so much more than that. You know, what I've covered today is basically how to load in data, how to explore the data, but I mean, there's all manner of different things you can do. do with these with these tools appear like geoprocessing tools. If you're familiar with GIS a little bit, you might be familiar with these, like clipping. If you have a load of points and you want to clip them by a certain area, you can do that you can dissolve polygons into one another. You can merge different datasets together, loads and loads of different stuff, many of which you might not even use, but it's just it's nice to know that they're out there. But yeah, I'm gonna I will stop talking to them. I've seen a common thing going off quite a lot. So people have questions, then please go ahead. I could literally talk and demonstrate this for hours on end. But hopefully that has given you a reasonable idea. 

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
